although this may not look like a
typical chemistry laboratory this is the
chemistry department of Glasgow
University we're here to find out about
the chemistry of wood each year treeger
was a new ring on the outside just the
needs the bark the middle part or path
where the ranks have a small diameter
was made by the tree when it was young
the larger rings on the outside were
made when the tree was older each vein
has two parts
this parts are called early wood and lit
wood the early wood has grown early in
the summer here the sails are large and
the cell walls are thin which means this
part of the wood is light in color and
has low density in late wit the sails
are smaller and have thicker cell walls
meaning this part of the word is dark in
color and is more dense the chemistry of
the sails is important because it
determines the properties of the wood
and its fibres it is the alternation of
early and late wood the give September
as green pattern one of the things that
makes it look attractive this isn't
actually densitometer as it is to make
measurements of the density of the wood
in the different ranks these thin strips
of wood contain the Rings from the
middle of the tree to the bark which
represent the whole life of the tree the
denser wood absorbs more of the egg
shades just like bonds do in a medical
x-ray in this machine the beam of x-rays
is very fine like a needle so it can
take very precise measurements of small
areas density changes within a rang and
generally increases from the middle of
the tree to the bark the weight which
parts of the rang of show up as peaks in
the density curve
word is mainly made from cellulose which
is a type of carbohydrate cellulose is
made up of long chains of carbon
hydrogen and oxygen atoms and helps to
give the wood its strength the root also
contains lignin the type of natural
plastic which protects the wood and also
binds together the cellulose chains to
give the cell walls rigidity
understanding how the cellulose and
lignin work together is important for
understanding the properties of the wood
this is an infrared microscope which is
used to study the cellulose and lignin
in the different parts of the cell
structure the more vertical the chains
of cellulose in the tree this stuffer
and stronger the wood in the middle of
the tree the chains go round and round
in a spiral so the middle bit of the T
is less stiff and not so strong towards
the outside of the tree the cellulose
chains are more vertical making this
part of the wood stronger and stiffer a
young tree needs to be flexible so that
it combined with the wind without
breaking but as it gets older and larger
it must become stiffer to avoid being
remover that's why it grew stronger and
stiffer woods the older it gets these
two pieces of wood were cut from the
same tree one cut from the wood close to
the middle of the tree the pet and one
cut from the wood close to the bark the
piece from the path is more flexible
than the piece from the end as easier to
band as my fingers the wood in the metal
of the tree is less dense because it
contains a lot of air and so this part
of the Chi is good for making insulation
the wood on the outside of the tree is
good for building because it is stronger
and stiffer
in a sanding tree the wood contains
water rather than air the water it needs
to stay alive some of the water is so
tightly linked to the molecules in the
cell wall that when we take the wood out
of the tree and dry it the wood shrinks
which is why this piece is split
different parts of the wood shrink by
different amounts when one side of the
timber shrinks more than the other the
piece bends understanding and limiting
this distortion is important for cell
Miller's because been pieces of wood are
not so useful
there are also some chemicals in the
wood that don't have a structural
function these are particularly common
and nods which is why there are a darker
color here at Glasgow University they
are researching continued uses for these
natural chemicals such as a medicine
these are socks liked extractors which
are used to take the useful chemicals
out of the woods so they can be studied
the general name for these chemicals as
extractives this is a high performance
liquid chromatography which is used to
separate the extractors and analyze
their chemical composition by better
understanding the chemistry of wood it
will be possible for foresters to grow
trees with improved properties for the
various different pieces of wood and the
chemicals inside and also to help wood
processors choose the right trees to
make their products and to reduce
wastage
you